2008 Alzheimer’s Association Research Grants
― Portfolio Profile
In fiscal year 2008, the Alzheimer’s Association funded more than
$26 million in research initiatives, including $25.4 million in
grants to 131 individual investigators. Funded projects represent
the proposals ranked highest by peer reviewers in an extremely
competitive field of 599 applications. Since 1982, the Alzheimer’s
Association has committed over $250 million to more than 1,700
best-of-field grant proposals.


11 percent investigate brain imaging, biomarkers and clinical
tools that may result in earlier and more accurate diagnoses,
timely interventions and effective disease monitoring.



18 percent explore novel treatment strategies, including antiamyloid compounds and nutritional therapies.



15 percent study best practices in care for people with
dementia living in nursing homes, in assisted-living
communities and at home.

Awards by grant category










5 Zenith Society Awards support senior scientists who have
made significant contributions to the field and continue to
pursue promising lines of investigations about disease
mechanisms, diagnosis, novel treatments and quality care.
73 Investigator-Initiated Research Grants fund established
scientists exploring important questions across the entire
research spectrum, from basic neurobiology and genetic risk
factors to disease-modifying treatments and evidence-based,
quality care.
48 New Investigator Research Grants provide the next
generation of scientists with funding that enables them to
gather preliminary data, test procedures and develop
hypotheses. These grants advance research while supporting
early-career development of researchers who have earned
their doctoral degrees within the last 10 years.
4 Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer Care Grants were
awarded—in partnership with Intel Corporation—to
investigators exploring how computers, monitoring devices
and other electronics can be used to meet the day-to-day
needs of people with Alzheimer’s disease and those who care
for them.
1 Senator Mark Hatfield Award in Clinical Research
focuses on strategies to make earlier and more accurate
diagnoses.

Research themes


14 percent of projects funded in 2008 explore the molecular
mechanisms that contribute to the production of betaamyloid, the abnormal chemical alterations of tau and the
normal functions of related proteins implicated in Alzheimer
pathology.



11 percent investigate the toxic properties of beta-amyloid,
mediators of this toxicity and the adverse effect of betaamyloid on cell-to-cell communication.



14 percent study the effect of Alzheimer’s disease on cellular
properties and functions that normally protect and maintain
neurons in the brain.



17 percent examine other factors that may contribute to
Alzheimer’s disease, including inflammation, blood vessel
damage, nutritional deficits, genetic risk factors and lifestyle
factors.

Other awards
In addition to funding individual scientists in five grant categories,
the Alzheimer’s Association 2008 awards provide more than
$600,000 to support two large-scale initiatives and a joint award
with other funding organizations.



Australian Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(A-ADNI) A-ADNI aims to bring key Australian imaging
and biomarker studies in line with ADNI protocols. If
successful, A-ADNI will greatly expand the pool of ADNI
data and samples.



ADNI Genotyping Project Association funding provides an
additional year of support to researchers studying the
amounts of tau and beta-amyloid in the cerebral spinal fluid
(CSF) of individuals who are cognitively normal, individuals
with mild cognitive impairment and individuals with
Alzheimer’s. Documenting changes in tau and beta-amyloid
CSF concentrations over time will help establish the potential
role of these biomarkers in early detection.



Tomorrow’s Leaders Award The Alzheimer’s Association
joined with the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund and Lou Ruvo Brain
Institute to establish this award, which recognizes
outstanding new M.D. or Ph.D. Alzheimer’s disease
investigators who have made pivotal contributions to early
detection, treatment and prevention. Each organization
contributed $100,000 to the award program, supporting the
work of three investigators.

Peer-reviewed evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific Relations
Division engages a panel of three or four volunteer scientists for
each research proposal to evaluate the merits of the proposal
anonymously. The Association’s Medical and Scientific Advisory
Council (MSAC) ensures the fairness of individual evaluations
and fine-tunes each year’s awards so that the overall portfolio
covers established research areas and moves the field forward in
important new directions. Based on peer-review scores and MSAC
review, the Association’s science staff estimates that 37 percent of
proposals received in 2008 deserved funding. Only about 21
percent could be supported with available resources.


