2010 Alzheimer’s Association Research Grants
― Portfolio Profile
In 2010, the Alzheimer’s Association International Research Grant
Program awarded nearly $14 million in funding to 84
investigators. Funded projects represent the proposals ranked
highest by peer reviewers in an extremely competitive field of 740
applications. Since 1982, the Alzheimer’s Association has
committed over $279 million to more than 1,900 best-of-field
grant proposals.

●

1 Mentored New Investigator Research Grant to Promote
Diversity (MNIRGD) helps close the gap between diverse and
non-diverse investigator populations. The MNIRGD is
intended to enhance the capacity of scientists to conduct basic,
clinical and social/behavioral research.

●

1 Senator Mark Hatfield Award in Clinical Research
focuses on strategies to make earlier and more accurate
diagnoses.

Awards by grant category
●

5 Zenith Society Awards support senior scientists who
have made significant contributions to the field and continue
to pursue promising lines of investigation about disease
mechanisms, diagnosis, novel treatments and quality care.

●

25 Investigator-Initiated Research Grants fund established
scientists exploring important questions across the entire
research spectrum, from basic neurobiology and genetic risk
factors to disease-modifying treatments and evidence-based,
quality care.

●

43 New Investigator Research Grants provide the next
generation of scientists with funding that enables them to
gather preliminary data, test procedures and develop
hypotheses. These grants advance research while supporting
the early-career development of researchers who have earned
their doctoral degrees within the last 10 years.

●

2 Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer Care Grants were
awarded—in partnership with Intel Corporation—to investigators exploring how computers, monitoring devices and other
electronics can be used to meet the day-to-day needs of people
with Alzheimer’s disease and those who care for them.

• 3 Novel Pharmacological Strategies to Prevent Alzheimer’s

Disease (NPSPAD) Grants fund investigators whose work is
aimed at the identification and validation of novel drug targets,
the screening and development of drugs for such targets, and
the evaluation of drug safety and efficacy.

• 2 Non-Pharmacological Strategies to Ameliorate

Symptoms of Alzheimer's (NPSASA) Grants fund
researchers whose work is aimed at the identification,
investigation and validation of non-pharmacological
approaches to improve the care of people with Alzheimer's and
related disorders.

●

2 New Investigator Research Grants to Promote Diversity
(NIRGD) fund investigators from backgrounds currently
underrepresented at academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or
related dementias research. These investigators from diverse
backgrounds are conducting basic, clinical and
social/behavioral research grounded in the advanced methods
and experimental approaches needed to solve problems related
to Alzheimer’s disease.

Research themes
●

22 percent of projects funded in 2010 explore the molecular
mechanisms that contribute to the production of betaamyloid, the abnormal chemical alterations of tau and the
normal functions of related proteins implicated in Alzheimer
pathology.

●

36 percent investigate the underlying pathology of
Alzheimer’s, including the effect of beta-amyloid, mediators
of toxicity, the adverse effect of beta-amyloid on cell-tocell communication, and the effect of Alzheimer’s disease on
cellular properties and functions that normally protect and
maintain neurons in the brain.

● 5 percent examine other factors that may contribute to
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias, including blood
vessel damage and genetic risk factors.
● 7 percent investigate brain imaging, biomarkers and clinical
tools that may result in earlier and more accurate diagnoses,
timely interventions and effective disease monitoring.
● 22 percent explore novel treatment strategies and the
improvement of clinical trial designs.
● 8 percent study improving care for people with dementia
through new technologies, and exploring the values and
beliefs of diverse cultures that impact use of health
services.
Peer-reviewed evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific Relations
Division engages a panel of three or four volunteer scientists for
each research proposal to evaluate the merits of the proposal
anonymously. The Association’s Medical and Scientific Advisory
Council (MSAC) ensures the fairness of individual evaluations
and fine-tunes each year’s awards so that the overall portfolio
covers established research areas and moves the field forward in
important new directions. Based on peer-review scores and MSAC
review, the Association’s science staff estimates that 21 percent of
proposals received in 2010 deserved funding. Of these grants, only
about 50 percent were supported with available resources, equal to
approximately 11 percent of all applications received.

