2011 Alzheimer’s Association Grants Portfolio
— Organized by trends in research
Molecules and Pathways
Production of beta-amyloid

Mechanisms of Neuroprotection by Presenilin 1
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How does PS1 protect nerve cells through processing of the
ephrinB2 receptor, and how do mutations in PS1 linked to
Alzheimer’s disease affect this process?

Developing Knock-In Mouse Models of Loss of Presenilin
Function in Familial Alzheimer’s Disease (FAD)
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How do two different PS1 mutations in families with early onset
compare and contrast in terms of PS1 function and the
development of Alzheimer-like brain pathology and dysfunction?

Novel Regulation of APP and Beta-Secretase (BACE) in
Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How do microRNA interact with other signaling pathways that
help to regulate the expression of APP and BACE1, and how does
dysfunction of microRNA regulation affect the levels of betaamyloid in nerve cells?


Novel Regulation of BACE1 by Nitrosative and Metabolic
Stresses
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How does nitric oxide and the AMPK/SIRT/PGC-1 signaling
network regulate the expression and activity of BACE1?

CRF Receptor Antagonism in Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
What role does the brain protein corticotropin-releasing factor
(CRF) play in toxic tau and beta-amyloid production, and which
genetic and drug therapies hinder Alzheimer’s-related CRF
activities?

2011 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by trends in research

Presenilin 1 as a Regulator of Mitochondrial Dynamics
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
What are the adverse effects of mutant PS1 on mitochondria, and
how do these effects lead to brain cell dysfunction?
Beta-amyloid toxicity

Neuronal Vulnerability to Amyloid Peptides: From Drosophila
to Human Brain
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Which genes are associated with increased vulnerability to cell
death in nerve cells exposed to beta-amyloid and other protein
fragments?

The Involvement of Histone Acetyl-Transferases (HAT) in
Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,999 over two years
Do increased brain levels of beta-amyloid induce change in HAT
activity that may be associated with synaptic damage?

Intracellular Oligomeric Abeta and Endosomal Pathology in
APPE693Q Mice
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Does cystatin C alleviate the pathologic changes associated with
beta-amyloid?

Pathogenic Mechanism of Neuronal Cell Cycle Re-Entry in
Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Does beta-amyloid cause nerve cells to re-enter the cell cycle, and
what are the molecular mechanisms by which this occurs and
which lead to cell death?

APE1/Ref-1’s Dual Functions Countering Beta Amyloid
Induced Genotoxicity
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,990 over two years
Does beta-amyloid disrupt the activities of APE1/Ref-1 and make
the cells more vulnerable to amyloid-related toxicity?
1


Mechanisms of the Neuromodulatory Action of Beta-Amyloid
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,000 over two years
Does beta-amyloid have the ability to modulate the release of
three neurotransmitters—glutamate, GABA and aspartate—in the
hippocampus, and are receptors for these messenger chemicals
affected by beta-amyloid?

Disruption of Interneuronal Networks by Beta-Amyloid
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
How does beta-amyloid affect the activities of interneurons,
especially their role in transmitting chemical messages across
synapses?

Mechanism Underlying Oligomeric Abeta Induced-Axonal
Transport Dysfunction
New Investigator Research Grant to Promote Diversity —
$100,000 over two years
How do beta-amyloid oligomers inhibit nutrient transport in nerve
cells, and how are receptors and signaling pathways affected by
treatment of the cells with beta-amyloid oligomers?

Beta-Amyloid 42 Positively Regulates Alpha7-Cholinergic
Receptors
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Can low brain concentrations of beta-amyloid help maintain
cognitive health by regulating the activity of alpha7-cholinergic
receptors?
Tau and neurofibrillary tangles

Metals and Neurofibrillary Tangles: A Novel Therapeutic Target
New Investigator Research Grant — $96,000 over two years
What is the role of metal ions in the development and formation of
neurofibrillary tangles?

MicroRNA Regulation of MAPT in Alzheimer’s Disease, Limbic
Type
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
What happens in the regions of DNA controlling the expression of
tau and the microRNA that bind to them?

2011 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by trends in research

The Role of Tau in Chromosome Stability and Its Link to
Neurodegeneration
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,935 over two years
How do tau mutations cause chromosomal abnormalities, and how
do those abnormalities lead to neurodegeneration in the brain?

Double Stranded RNA Receptor Function in Neurofibrillary
Tangle Formation
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Does protein kinase R (PKR) regulate tau phosphorylation in mice
— or does the removal of PKR reduce the abnormal tau levels?

Role of EphB2 Signal in Tau Pathology in Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
How do changes in EphB2 signaling during Alzheimer’s disease
initiate the process of hyperphosphorylation and hasten the
process of tau pathology, and how can EphB2 activity be boosted
to prevent such pathology?
Other disease-related molecules and pathways

Lipidomic Biosignature in Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Which pathologic features of non-brain tissues predict the
presence of Alzheimer’s pathology in the brain, and how do
defects in lipid metabolism cause pathologies leading to
Alzheimer’s disease?

Role of Phospholipase D1 in Alzheimer’s Disease Pathogenesis
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How does PLD1 affect the transport and processing of APP in
nerve cells of the brain?

Role of Retinoic Acid in Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
How does neurogranin assist retinoic acid in regulating synaptic
activity, and improve synaptic health and cognitive function in
models of Alzheimer’s disease?

2


Abeta Catabolism and Its Impact in Alzheimer’s Disease
Pathogenesis
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How do enzymes in the brain degrade the beta-amyloid, and how
is this process affected by aging?

Regulation of Microglia Responses to A-Beta by Progranulin
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Do microglia with high progranulin levels also contain high levels
of cytokines, and how do progranulin levels affect the ability of
microglia to break down the protein fragment beta-amyloid?

Role of S-Nitrosylation in Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $97,443 over two years
Does nitric oxide help promote the toxic activities of beta-amyloid
by hindering normal ubiquitination?

Brain Hubs of Amyloid Deposition in Preclinical Stages of
Dopamine Active Transporter (DAT)
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,994 over two years
How do hub regions interact to promote the accumulation of betaamyloid?

Functional Analysis of Nicastrin
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How do different synthetic antigen binding (SAB) molecules
affect the ability of nicastrin to recognize different proteins?

Models, Imaging and Drugs for TDP-43 Pathobiology
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Where is the protein TDP-43 localized, how does it aggregate,
how is it transported within cells, and are there drug candidates
that alter its properties?

Regionally Differential Autophagic Protein Degradation
Expression in Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Does a malfunction of the protein degradation system in nerve
cells lead to the accumulation of defective proteins into amyloid
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles?

2011 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by trends in research

Synaptic dysfunction

The Complex Role of NADPH-Oxidase (NOX) in Alzheimer’s
Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Does oxidative damage associated with NOX cause damage to
synapses, and does that damage involve dysfunction of cofilin?

Cooperation of d-Catenin and Presenilin in the Synaptic
Pathology of Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
How are D-catenin and PS1 involved in the development and
maintenance of synapse structure and function?

Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Synaptic Dysfunction in
Dementia
Zenith Fellows Award — $450,000 over three years
How does mutated BRI2 cause synaptic dysfunction, and how
does it interact with the biochemical mechanisms involved in
production of beta-amyloid?

Memory Impairment by Soluble Oligomeric Tau
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How does oligomeric tau affect synaptic transmission in the brain,
and how does this effect lead to changes in memory function?

Biochemical and Functional Analyses of the Na+/Ca2+
Exchanger (NCX) in Alzheimer’s Pathology
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Does NCX1-3 promote beta-amyloid–induced toxicity, and what
are the links between beta-amyloid, calcium and the
overproduction of glutamate at synapses?

The Role of Synaptic Plasticity in the Development of
Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Do mice with less hippocampal plasticity suffer less diseaserelated pathology than mice with normal plasticity?

3


Synaptic Pathology Underlying Memory Loss in a Mouse Model
of Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
How does the elimination of certain microglia affect beta-amyloid
production in mice, and are there significant losses of learningassociated plasticity and increases in behavioral deficits?

Nicotinic Alpha7-NMDA Receptor Interactions in the Aged
Nonhuman Primate
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Does stimulation of nicotinic receptors lead to amyloid-induced
losses of NMDA NR2B activity, and can NMDA functioning be
restored by administering a drug that deactivates a7nAchR?

Disruption of brain cell functions/properties

Genetics and Risk Factors of Dementia

Understanding the Selective Vulnerability of Neurons in
Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
What are the properties of vulnerable nerve cells, and what are the
biochemical pathways that make these cells vulnerable?

Genetic factors

Role of Tau Protein in Inflammation-Mediated Neurotoxicity
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
What is the role of microglia in the development of brain
inflammation and abnormal tau?

Genetic and Environmental Influences on Rate of Progression
of Alzheimer’s Disease
Mentored New Investigator Research Grant to Promote Diversity
— $149,831 over three years
Are genetic factors associated with the rate of progression of lateonset Alzheimer’s disease, and, if so, how do they interact with
known environmental influences that determine overall variation
in rate of progression?

Dysregulation of Corticothalamic Circuitry in Alzheimer's
Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
How do abnormal activity and seizures develop in the
corticothalamic pathway of mice genetically modified to express
Alzheimer’s-like pathology?

The Role of Specific Gamma Secretase Pathways in Microglia
Activation
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,200 over two years
What are the different ways that gamma-secretase may affect the
activity of microglial cells?
Justin Legleiter, Ph.D.
West Virginia University Foundation
Morgantown, West Virginia
Mechanisms and Consequences of Beta-Amyloid Binding to
Cellular Surfaces
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,592 over two years
Do electrical and chemical changes to brain cell surfaces enable
beta-amyloid to bind to these surfaces more easily, and does this
binding lead to neuronal damage and death?

2011 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by trends in research


Exome Sequencing of Late-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease Families
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,677 over two years
Are genetic mutations linked to late-onset Alzheimer’s disease?

Genetics of Rate of Cognitive Decline in a Clinical Trial of
Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,072 over two years
Are certain single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with rates of cognitive and functional decline, and do particular
chromosomes harbor the SNPs most closely associated with
dementia progression rates?
Risk factors

Hypertension, Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy and
Neuroinflammation
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How does high blood pressure contribute to the development of
Alzheimer’s pathology and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA)?

Interaction Between Hypertension and Alzheimer's Disease
Zenith Fellows Award — $450,000 over three years
How does high blood pressure affect Alzheimer’s pathology,
especially the ability of the brain to remove beta-amyloid?
4


Vitamin D and the Risk of Dementia in the Cardiovascular
Health Study
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,662 over two years
Can low blood 25(OH) D levels serve as a risk factor of
Alzheimer’s and other neurological disorders?

Offspring of Ethnically Diverse People With and Without
Alzheimer's Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
How do ethnicity and family history of Alzheimer’s disease
interact with other risk factors, and is the risk of Alzheimer’s
associated with educational background different among persons
of differing ethnicity?

Is Sleep Disordered Breathing in Normal Aging a Risk Factor
for Alzheimer’s Disease?
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,778 over two years
Are there associations between sleep disorders and levels of betaamyloid in the brain?

A Blood Isotope Labeled Amyloid-Beta Test for Alzheimer's
Disease
Zenith Fellows Award — $450,000 over three years
How does the body produce and dispose of beta-amyloid, and how
do changes in those processes affect the development of disease?

Multimodal Monitoring of Functional Status in Moderate
Alzheimer's Disease
Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer’s Care — $200,000 over
three years
Can cholinesterase-evoked changes in the functional status of
individuals with moderate Alzheimer’s disease be tracked by
using mobile monitoring, but not standard, functional measures?

Plasma Small RNAs as Biomarkers for Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Are levels of any specific RNAs associated with development of
disease, or with the presence of risk factors such as age or lifestyle
factors?
Brain imaging

Neural Correlates of Cognitive Efficiency in Individuals at Risk
for Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
What is the role of dementia risk factors on white matter
functioning and on cognitive efficiency, and do APOE-ε4 carriers
display greater white matter abnormalities than non-carriers?

Chronic Pain and Cognitive Dysfunction in Older Adults
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
How is long-term pain associated with cognitive decline?

Diagnosis and disease monitoring
Biomarkers

Neural Markers of Subjective Cognitive Impairment
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Do persons with reported memory impairment exhibit eventrelated potentials that resemble those of persons with amnestic
MCI?

2011 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by trends in research

Multimodal Imaging in Depressed Adults at Risk for
Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,994 over two years
Can resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
and diffusion tensor imaging methods discriminate differences in
the episodic memory associated with functional and structural
brain networks of individuals with late-life depression, with and
without aMCI?

Hippocampal Striatal Anatomy in Mild Cognitive Impairment: A
7T MRI Study
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Does the combination of cerebrospinal fluid testing and 7T MRI
assessments provide an optimal way of determining an
individual’s risk of progressing from MCI to dementia?

Functional Reorganization of the Brain: Response to
Alzheimer’s Pathology?
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Can the use of multiple imaging techniques identify changes in
brain function among a group of cognitively healthy people,
people with Alzheimer’s disease, and people with mild cognitive
impairment?
5

Drug development and clinical interventions
Drug therapies/treatments

PDE4D Selective Inhibitors for the Treatment of Memory
Impairment
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Can PDE4D inhibitors restore the ability of synapses to perform
memory functions and improve the ability to perform behavioral
tasks requiring memory?

Alzheimer’s Disease: A New Approach to Cognitive
Neurorehabilitation
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
Can transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) partially restore
cognitive function in persons with Alzheimer’s disease?
Marcello D'Amelio, Ph.D.
IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation

Preventing and Monitoring Onset of Synaptic Degeneration in
Early Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,400 over two years
Can drugs that target abnormal mitochondrial function prevent
caspase-3-related synaptic damage and memory loss?

The Role of Mononuclear Phagocytes in Tauopathies
Multi-Centered Project Grant-Component Project 1
How do two types of mononuclear phagocytes(MNPs)—microglia
and monocytes—contribute to the development of taupathies?

Inflammation and Microglial Activation in AICD Transgenic Mice

Multi-Centered Project Grant-Component Project 2
How does the fragment known as the APP intracellular domain
(AICD) cause inflammation in the brain?

Genetic Tagging of Mononuclear Phagocytes in Alzheimer’s
Mouse Models
Multi-Centered Project Grant-Component Project 3
What is the role of monocytes in brain inflammation?

The Biological Basis of Phenotypic Diversity of Microglia in AD
Multi-Centered Project Grant-Component Project 4
How does amyloid activate microglia and what are the effects of
such activation on brain inflammation?
2011 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by trends in research

Mechanisms of RXR-Stimulated Reversal of Amyloid-Induced
Phenotypes
Zenith Fellows Award — $450,000 over three years
How does the drug bexarotene, which activates RXR, improve
clearance of beta-amyloid from the brain?

Two Interventions for Early Stage Dementia: A Comparative
Efficacy Trial
Non-Pharmacological Strategies to Ameliorate Symptoms of
Alzheimer's Disease — $399,990 over three years
How effective are two promising nonpharmacological
interventions at reducing the social, psychological, physical and
behavioral impact of dementia?

HDAC Inhibition: Treating Dementia Through Cholesterol
Transport and CLU
New Investigator Research Grant — $99,990 over two years
Can HDAC inhibitors prevent dementia-related neurological
damage?

Restoring Synaptic Plasticity in a Transgenic Rat Model of
Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Can a drug known to inhibit the activity of TNF-alpha prevent the
progression of Alzheimer’s-like pathology in the brain and restore
the ability of brain synapses to perform functions vital to memory?

Fighting Against Alzheimer's Selective Cholinergic
Neurodegeneration
Novel Pharmacological Strategies to Prevent Alzheimer's
Disease — $399,900 over three years
Can an M2 inhibitor preserve forebrain cholinergic neurons and
cognitive function?
Nutritional and lifestyle interventions

BAILA-C: Bypassing Alzheimer’s, Increasing Latinos’ Activity
and Cognition
New Investigator Research Grant to Promote Diversity — $99,223
over two years
Are there culturally appropriate ways to increase the physical
activity of older Latino persons and reduce their risk of cognitive
decline?
6


Dietary Factors, Inflammation, and Cognitive Decline in
Diabetic Elderly
New Investigator Research Grant — $100,000 over two years
How does vitamin E protect the brain from oxidative stress and
cognitive decline, and do certain types of diabetic individuals
benefit more than others from vitamin E?

Care, support and social-behavioral factors

Caregiving Transitions in Alzheimer's Disease for Rural
African-Americans
The Senator Mark Hatfield Award for Clinical Research in
Alzheimer’s Disease — $200,000 over three years
How do rural African-Americans and their families make
decisions and manage the transitions associated with the
progression of Alzheimer’s disease?

Home-Delivered Intervention for Depression in Alzheimer's
Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant — $200,000 over three years
Is the new Problem Adaption Therapy (PATH) better than
supportive therapy at reducing symptoms of depression and
increasing the patient’s ability to perform common daily tasks?

Context Aware Computing with Motivational Counseling to
Enable Dressing
Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer’s Care — $180,000 over
two years
Can a technology solution called Development of a Responsive
Emotive Sensing System (DRESS) detect and respond to an
individual’s style and guide the dressing event through interactive,
sensor-based motivational coaching?

2011 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by trends in research

7


