2011 Alzheimer’s Association Research Grants
― Portfolio Profile
In 2011, the Alzheimer’s Association International Research Grant
Program awarded more than $12.8 million in funding to 78
investigators. Funded projects represent the proposals ranked
highest by peer reviewers in an extremely competitive field of 875
applications. Since 1982, the Alzheimer’s Association has
committed over $292 million to more than 2,000 best-of-field
grant proposals.

●

• 1 Multi-Center Project Grant (MCPG) was awarded to
support team science among 4 Individual Investigator
Research Grant (IIRG) Projects exploring mechanisms
associated with Alzheimer’s disease and identifying potential
therapeutic targets for Alzheimer’s. This award promotes
collaboration between scientists, furthering interdisciplinary
research and encouraging team science.

Awards by grant category
●

4 Zenith Society Awards support senior scientists who
have made significant contributions to the field and continue
to pursue promising lines of investigation about disease
mechanisms, diagnosis, novel treatments and quality care.

●

20 Investigator-Initiated Research Grants (IIRG) fund
established scientists exploring important questions across the
entire research spectrum, from basic neurobiology and genetic
risk factors to disease-modifying treatments and evidencebased, quality care.

●

41 New Investigator Research Grants (NIRG) provide the
next generation of scientists with funding that enables them to
gather preliminary data, test procedures and develop
hypotheses. These grants advance research while supporting
the early-career development of researchers who have earned
their doctoral degrees within the last 10 years.

●

2 Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer Care (ETAC)
Grants were awarded—in partnership with Intel
Corporation—to investigators exploring how computers,
monitoring devices and other electronics can be used to meet
the day-to-day needs of people with Alzheimer’s disease and
those who care for them.

●

In addition to funding individual scientists in 10 grant
categories, the Alzheimer’s Association awarded a special
grant of $250,000 in support of the International Genetics of
Alzheimer’s Project (IGAP). Association funding supports
this large, international collaboration that brings together wellestablished and highly regarded research groups throughout
the world to enable an unprecedented sharing and analysis of
Alzheimer’s genetic data from more than 40,000 individuals.
Funding also provides opportunities for participating research
groups to convene to further the field’s understanding of how
information from genetics may be used by the field as a whole.
Research themes
•

19 percent of projects funded in 2011 explore the molecular
mechanisms that contribute to the production of betaamyloid, the mediators of beta-amyloid’s toxicity, and its
adverse effect on cell-to-cell communication.

•

36 percent investigate the abnormal chemical alterations of
tau and the normal functions of related proteins implicated in
Alzheimer’s pathology, as well as the cellular properties and
functions that normally protect and maintain neurons in the
brain.

•

14 percent examine other factors that may contribute to
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias, including blood
vessel damage and genetic risk factors.

•

9 percent investigate brain imaging, biomarkers and clinical
tools that may result in earlier and more accurate diagnoses,
timely interventions and effective disease monitoring.

•

18 percent explore novel treatment strategies and nonpharmacological interventions.

•

4 percent study ways to improve care for people with
dementia through new technologies and explore the values
and beliefs of diverse cultures that impact use of health
services.

• 1 Non-Pharmacological Strategies to Ameliorate
Symptoms of Alzheimer's Disease (NPSASA) Grant funds a
researcher whose work is aimed at the identification,
investigation or validation of non-pharmacological approaches
to improve the care of people with Alzheimer's and related
disorders.
●

2 New Investigator Research Grants to Promote Diversity
(NIRGD) fund investigators currently underrepresented at
academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or related dementias
research. These investigators from diverse backgrounds are
conducting basic, clinical and social/behavioral research
grounded in the advanced methods and experimental
approaches needed to solve problems related to Alzheimer’s
disease.

1 Senator Mark Hatfield Award (HAT) in Clinical
Research focuses on strategies to make earlier and more
accurate diagnoses.

• Other awards:

• 1 Novel Pharmacological Strategies to Prevent Alzheimer’s
Disease (NPSPAD) Grant funds an investigator whose work
is aimed at the identification and validation of a novel drug
target, the screening and development of a drug for such a
target, or the evaluation of drug safety and efficacy.

1 Mentored New Investigator Research Grant to Promote
Diversity (MNIRGD) helps close the gap between diverse and
non-diverse investigator populations. The MNIRGD is
intended to enhance the capacity of scientists to conduct basic,
clinical and social/behavioral research.

Page 1 of 2

Peer-reviewed evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific Relations
Division engages a panel of three or four volunteer scientists for
each research proposal to evaluate the merits of the proposal
anonymously. The Association’s Medical and Scientific Advisory
Council (MSAC) ensures the fairness of individual evaluations
and fine-tunes each year’s awards so that the overall portfolio
covers established research areas and moves the field forward in
important new directions. Based on peer-review scores and MSAC
review, the Association’s science staff estimates that 22 percent of
proposals received in 2011 deserved funding. Only about 9
percent could be supported with available resources.

Page 2 of 2

