2012 Alzheimer’s Association Research Grants
― Portfolio Profile
In 2012, the Alzheimer’s Association International Research Grant
Program awarded approximately $12.2 million in funding to 78
scientific investigations. Of these, 74 funded projects represent
proposals ranked highest by peer reviewers in an extremely
competitive field of 922 applications. In addition to funding
individual scientists in 8 grant categories, the Alzheimer’s
Association awarded 4 special scientific projects . Since 1982, the
Alzheimer’s Association has committed over $300 million to more
than 2,100 scientific investigations around the world.

●

2 Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer Care (ETAC)
Grants were awarded—in partnership with Intel
Corporation—to investigators exploring how computers,
monitoring devices and other electronics can be used to meet
the day-to-day needs of people with Alzheimer’s disease and
those who care for them.

●

3 New Investigator Research Grants to Promote Diversity
(NIRGD) fund investigators currently underrepresented at
academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or related dementias
research. These investigators are conducting basic, clinical
and social/behavioral research grounded in the advanced
methods and experimental approaches needed to solve
problems related to Alzheimer’s disease.

●

2 Mentored New Investigator Research Grant to Promote
Diversity (MNIRGD) helps close the gap between diverse and
non-diverse investigator populations, as well as provide a
forum for further training and support of a senior scientist. The
MNIRGD is intended to enhance the capacity of scientists to
conduct basic, clinical and social/behavioral research.

Research themes




32 percent of projects funded in 2012 explore the molecular
mechanisms that contribute to the production of betaamyloid, the mediators of beta-amyloid’s toxicity, and its
adverse effect on cell-to-cell communication.
27 percent investigate the abnormal chemical alterations of
tau and the normal functions of related proteins implicated in
Alzheimer’s pathology, as well as the cellular properties and
functions that normally protect and maintain neurons in the
brain.



7 percent examine other factors that may contribute to
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias, including blood
vessel damage and genetic risk factors.



12 percent investigate brain imaging, biomarkers and clinical
tools that may result in earlier and more accurate diagnoses,
timely interventions and effective disease monitoring.



12 percent explore novel treatment strategies and nonpharmacological interventions.



10 percent study ways to improve care for people with
dementia through new technologies and explore the values
and beliefs of diverse cultures that impact use of health
services.

Awards by grant category
●

●

15 Investigator-Initiated Research Grants (IIRG) fund
established scientists exploring important questions across the
entire research spectrum, from basic neurobiology and genetic
risk factors to disease-modifying treatments and evidencebased, quality care. This includes the Senator Mark Hatfield
in Clinical Research (HAT) award focusing on strategies to
make earlier and more accurate diagnoses.
47 New Investigator Research Grants (NIRG) provide the
next generation of scientists with funding that enables them to
gather preliminary data, test procedures and develop
hypotheses. These grants advance research while supporting
the early-career development of researchers who have earned
their doctoral degrees within the last 10 years.

 1 U.S.-U.K. Young Investigator Exchange Fellowship,

offered in partnership with the Alzheimer’s Research UK,
provides junior investigators with funding to develop
preliminary or pilot data, to test procedures and to develop
hypotheses on an international level. This program stimulates
cross oceanic collaborations.

 2 Neuronal Hyper Excitability and Seizures in Alzheimer’s
Disease (NESAD) grants promote increased understanding
regarding abnormal neural network activity and the
development of new pharmacological strategies to prevent or
treat seizures in Alzheimer’s.

 2 Development of New Cognitive and Functional
Instruments (DNCFI) grants advance research seeking to
investigate and develop cognitive or functional evaluation
instruments that can capture the earliest changes in disease, are
sensitive to change over time and/or could be used in clinical
trials.
Peer-reviewed evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific Relations
Division engages a panel of three or four volunteer scientists for
each research proposal to evaluate the merits of the proposal
anonymously. The Association’s Medical and Scientific Advisory
Council (MSAC) ensures the fairness of individual evaluations
and fine-tunes each year’s awards so that the overall portfolio
covers established research areas and moves the field forward in
important new directions. Based on peer-review scores and MSAC
review, the Association’s science staff estimates that
approximately 25 percent of proposals received in 2012 deserved
funding. Only about 8.5 percent could be supported with available
resources.

Page 1 of 1

