2012 Alzheimer’s Association Grants Portfolio
—Organized by categories in research

______________________________________________________________________________
Biology of Disease-Related Molecules
Production and clearance of beta-amyloid

Synaptic Production of Beta-Amyloid Peptide and Targeted
Inhibition Thereof
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,000 over two years
Can certain toxins inhibit beta-amyloid production in synaptic
vesicles, and what other mechanisms are responsible for
synaptic damage in Alzheimer’s disease?

Investigating the Physiological Role of Zinc Binding to BetaAmyloid
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How does zinc/APP binding affect APP function in laboratory
cells and in mice genetically engineered to develop Alzheimer’slike symptoms?

Protective Role of the Transcription Factor XBP1 in
Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What mechanisms underlie XBP1’s ability to regulate betaamyloid production and alleviate memory loss?

The Mechanisms of Action of Gamma-Secretase Modulators
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$240,000 over three
years
How can combinations of gamma-secretase modulators alter the
production of different forms of beta-amyloid?

Targeting Subcellular Beta-Amyloid Oligomers in Human
Alzheimer’s Primary Cells
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How does antibody treatment prevent oligomer formation in
subcellular regions?

Proteomic Analysis of Gamma-Secretase Residing in Raft
Domains
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How does gamma-secretase function when attached to lipid
rafts, and what other proteins work with gamma-secretase when
it is in this position?
Beta-amyloid toxicity

New Investigator Research Grant—$99,979 over two years
Assessing the Effect of Oligomeric Abeta on Neuronal and
Synaptic Integrity
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,979 over two years
How does beta-amyloid in the different animal models cause
synaptic damage and brain cell death?

CypD and Abeta-Impaired Axonal Mitochondrial Motility and
Docking
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How do cypD and beta-amyloid hinder mitochondrial movement
and synaptic function?

Oxidized Amyloid Proteins Induce Genome Damage in
Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Where do beta-amyloid, tau and alpha-synuclein bind to brain
cell DNA, and what DNA damage is caused by such binding?
Tau and neurofibrillary tangles

Mechanisms of Tau and ER Stress for Novel Alzheimer’s
Disease Therapeutics
New Investigator Research Grant to Promote Diversity—
$100,000 over two years
How does tau activate the stress response of the endoplasmic
reticulum?


The Role of Tau in Excitotoxicity in Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,400 over two years
How does tau-induced pathology occur in the brain, and what
are the mechanisms that underlie the process?

Fyn in Tau-Induced Neurodegeneration
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$239,250 over three
years
How does the enzyme Fyn contribute to the formation of
neurofibrillary tangles?

Effects of Risk Factors on Tau-Mediated Memory Deficits
New Investigator Research Grant—$97,493 over two years
What are the effects of diabetes on tau phosphorylation?
Other disease-related molecules and pathways

Regulation of LDLR as Alzheimer’s Disease Therapeutics
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Does modifying the activity of proteins that reduce levels of
low-density lipoprotein receptors affect apolipoprotein and betaamyloid levels in mice with Alzheimer’s-like brain changes?

Neuroinflammation-Induced Alterations of GLT-1 and
Synaptotoxicity in Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What mechanisms underlie the role of beta-amyloid and
interleukin-1 in repressing the activity of the protein glutamate
transporter-1?

The Role of Progranulin in Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How might progranulin activity become altered in old age or
disease?

Induction of BDNF and NT-3 by Cinnamon Metabolite
Sodium Benzoate
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$239,910 over three
years
How does sodium benzoate increase levels of BDNF and NT-3
in the brain?

Effect of EphB2/CTF2 Peptide on NMDAR Phosphorylation
and Signaling
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$240,000 over three
years
How is the cellular signaling pathway involving gammasecretase affected by genetic mutations of the gamma-secretase
gene?
Disruption of brain cell functions/properties

Effect of Caloric Restriction on Septohippocampal Neurons in
Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$240,000 over three
years
How does a restricted-calorie diet affect the activity of genes
involved in the biochemical pathways of Alzheimer’s-related
degeneration?

Diminished Cortical GABAergic Inhibition in a Mouse Model
of Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How do animals’ corticocortical system and thalamocortical
system become “desensitized” to the protective effects of
GABA?

Learning From Epilepsy to Understand Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How do changes in neuronal channel activity in the
hippocampus lead to excitotoxicity, brain seizures and cognitive
loss?


Mechanisms of Misfolding and Aggregation of Septin Proteins
in Alzheimer’s
New Investigator Research Grant to Promote Diversity—
$99,998 over two years
How is proper folding of septins maintained, and what
mechanisms are responsible for misfolding and aggregation?
2012 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by research category

Page 2 of 7


Glutaredoxin 2, Mitochondrial Protein Glutathionylation and
Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$239,862 over three
years
Do high glutaredoxin 2 levels prevent nerve cell damage caused
by Alzheimer’s genes, and can drugs to activate glutaredoxin 2
be viable treatments to prevent or slow the progression of
Alzheimer’s disease?


Development of Safer Anesthesia for People with Alzheimer’s
Disease


Physiological Basis of Memory Impairments in Rat Model of
Early-Stage Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How does the progression of degeneration affect the oscillatory
activity associated with memory formation?

Biomarkers

Dementia Risk Factors and Prevention

Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$240,000 over three years
How do isoflurane and desflurane affect amyloid plaque formation,
brain structure and learning and memory?

Diagnosis and Detection of Alzheimer’s Disease


Subjective Cognitive Complaints: An Early Indicator of
Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$96,565 over two years
What is the role of subjective cognitive complaints (SCCs) in
Alzheimer’s risk?


Imaging Biomarkers of Preclinical Cerebrovascular Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Are tiny hemorrhages, reduced brain blood flow, stroke-related
lesions and narrowing of carotid arteries that lead to the brain
potential biomarkers of preclinical CVD?


Detection of Early Cortical Pathology Using MEG and Speech
Analysis
New Investigator Research Grant—$97,090 over two years
What are the speech patterns of people with Alzheimer’s disease
and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and conditions that
precede clinical dementia?


Modulation of Metabolic Processes to Prevent Alzheimer’s
Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$239,996 over three
years
Do combination treatments of leptin plus amylin improve
cognitive function more than either hormone acting alone?

A Longitudinal Study of the Changes in mtDNA of People
With Alzheimer's Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Do people with Alzheimer’s disease have a higher than normal
rate of mitochondrial DNA accumulation in their peripheral
blood?


Infection/Inflammation and Cognitive Decline
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Does periodontal inflammation exacerbate cognitive and
neurological changes linked with dementia?


Early Changes in the Brain Proteome and Alzheimer's Disease
Risk
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What human synaptic proteins may be linked to early
Alzheimer’s?


The Red Cell Distribution Width, a Potential Marker of
Dementia Risk
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,831 over two years
Is increased RDW related to cognitive decline, risk of dementia
and changes in brain structure?

2012 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by research category


Exploration of Memory Change in Preclinical Alzheimer’s
Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,840 over two years
Which cognitive tests and biochemical markers are the most
simple, reliable and inexpensive for detecting early signs of the
Alzheimer’s disease process?
Page 3 of 7


Imaging and CSF Biomarkers in the Diagnosis of Early-Onset
Dementia
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$200,000 over three
years
Can the use of CSF biomarkers and PET brain imaging
distinguish between early-onset Alzheimer’s disease and
frontotemporal dementia?
Technology

Automated Semantic Indices for Early Detection of Cognitive
Changes
Development of New Cognitive Functional Instrumentation in
Alzheimer's Disease—$400,000 over two years
Can automatic speech recognition and computational linguistic
technologies be reliable in detecting subtle early cognitive
changes associated with risk of progressing to Alzheimer’s
disease?

Validation of a Simulation-Based Assessment of Cognitive
Functioning
Development of New Cognitive Functional Instrumentation in
Alzheimer's Disease—$362,821 over three years
Can SIMBAC assess sensitivity to change, affirm its reliability
and document its acceptability to older users?
Clinical tests

Evaluating the Structural Equivalence of Dementia Screening
Tests
New Investigator Research Grant to Promote Diversity—
$100,000 over two years
Can the MoCA test detect people who have reduced brain
function and distinguish them from healthy people?

Clinical and Pre-Clinical Drug Development and
Clinical Interventions
Drug therapies/treatments

Immune Mechanisms Involved in Responses to Multiepitope
Alzheimer’s Disease Vaccine
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$239,503 over three
years
Can the immune system generate antibodies against betaamyloid that are more powerful and specific than those
generated by conventional vaccines?

Testing the Therapeutic Efficacy of Neprilysin-Expressing
Neural Stem Cells
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How can neural stem cells be more effective at battling
Alzheimer’s pathologies?

Preclinical Testing of Lenalidomide as Anti-Amyloid
Treatment for Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Does lenalidomide have the ability to reduce TNG-alpha and
beta-amyloid levels in Alzheimer’s-like mice?

Pharmacological Manipulation of BDNF as Therapeutic
Challenge for Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What mechanisms may increase BDNF levels in cells and living
animals?

hFbx2/APP, a Novel Transgenic Mouse Model in the Study of
BACE1 Degradation
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$240,000 over three
years
Does the destruction of BACE1 reduce amyloid plaque
formation in the brain?

Barriers to Enrollment in Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease
Clinical Trials
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What are the barriers to Alzheimer’s clinical trial recruitment?

2012 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by research category

Page 4 of 7


Innate Immunity Stimulation as a Novel Therapeutic
Approach in Alzheimer’s Disease
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$240,000 over three years
Can stimulation of the immune system reduce these signs of
disease and reduce the accumulation of amyloid plaque in brain
blood vessels?

The role of the unfolded protein response in preventing amyloid
toxicity
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$240,000 over three years
Is CNB-100 a potential drug candidate for Alzheimer’s disease?


A Volunteer-Led Intervention to Reduce Behavioral Symptoms
of Dementia
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What are the benefits of tailored therapy treatments based on
each participant’s needs and interests?

Examining Sexual Consent Capacity in Cognitively
Compromised Older Adults
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,998 over two years
How do different institutions perceive the issue of sexual
consent and sexual activity among people with dementia?


Pyroglutamate Modified Abeta Species in Alzheimer’s Disease:
Target for Immunotherapy
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Can a vaccine direct the immune system to recognize and
remove pyroglutamate-modified beta-amyloid from the brain?


A Passive Tag-Free Approach to Localization and Activity
Monitoring
Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer's Care—$199,469 over 2
years
What are the benefits of a passive tag-free tracking system that
uses radio frequency (RF) signals?

Social/Behavioral and Cognitive/Functional


Amyloid-Related Imaging Abnormalities (Microbleeds) in
Atypical Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Are microbleeds associated with levels of cognitive decline,
amounts of amyloid plaque or other structural changes in the
brain?


A Family-Nurse Partnership for Care of Hospitalized Persons
With Dementia
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,979 over two years
How can the hospital environment be safer for people with
dementia and more conducive to physical and mental activity?

Spatial Learning on Neurogenesis and Behavior in
Alzheimer’s-Like Models
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What are the benefits of neuronal growth in rats injected with
beta-amyloid?

TAUT: Technology Adoption and Prediction Tool for
Everyday Technologies
Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer's Care—$199,790 over
three years
What are factors and predictors for successful technology uptake
in patients suffering from memory impairment?

2012 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by research category

Pathology and Genetics of Alzheimer’s Disease
Production and clearance of beta-amyloid

LRP1 and HSPG in Cerebrovascular Clearance of ABeta
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$240,000 over three
years
How do changes in LRP1 and HSPG levels affect the clearance
of beta-amyloid in animal models?

Enhancing Lysosome Biogenesis to Prevent Amyloid Plaque
Pathogenesis
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What is the role of the transcription factor TFEB in moderating
beta-amyloid production?
Page 5 of 7


Effect of RXR Agonist on Alzheimer’s Phenotype in APP Mice
Expressing APOE-e3 and e4
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How does bexarotene treatment affect brain beta-amyloid levels
and cognition?

Energy Substrates as a Tool for Treatment of Hyperexcitability
in Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuronal Hyperexcitability in Seizures and Alzheimer’s Disease
Research Grant—$396,969 over three years
How are nutrients able to reduce hyperexcitability caused by
beta-amyloid, and does this effect involve only nerve cells or are
other supporting cells in the brain also required?
Beta-amyloid toxicity

Death Receptors as Mediators of Amyloid-Induced
Cerebrovascular Dysfunction
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How does the interaction of beta-amyloid oligomers and death
receptors lead to blood vessel cell apoptosis?

Transmissibility of Amyloid-Beta Deposition by Blood and
Different Routes
Mentored New Investigator Research Grant to Promote
Diversity—$150,000 over two years
How does amyloid plaque formation in one region of the blood
or brain trigger more extensive plaque formation in the brain?

The Role of Amyloid Deposition in Blood-Brain Barrier
Dysfunction in Alzheimer’s Disease

over three years
What is the role of impaired blood flow and amyloid deposition
in blood-brain–barrier damage?

Inhibitory Neuron and Circuit Dysfunctions in Alzheimer’s
Disease Model
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Are beta-amyloid levels related to neuron function in the
hippocampus, and what are the ion channels responsible for
defective activity of inhibitory neurons?
Tau and neurofibrillary tangles


Age-Dependent Increases of Phosphorylated TDP-43 in APP
Mice
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What are the effects of amyloid deposition on phosphorylated
TDP-43 brain changes in Alzheimer’s disease?

VU University Medical Center Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Age-Dependent Toll-Like Receptor Signalling in the
Alzheimer’s Brain
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,857 over two years
Can the protein called interleukin-1 receptor–associated kinase4 prevent inflammation without hindering amyloid clearance?

Abeta Increases Glutamatergic Excitation and Induces
Epileptiform Activity
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What is the link between excitotoxicity and seizures, and what
molecular mechanisms may underlie this association?

2012 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by research category

Role of Microglia in Alzheimer’s and in Abeta and Tau
Immunotherapy
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
How are microglia involved in the development of plaques and
tangles, and how can they help the immune system combat these
protein aggregates?

Impact of Arginase-1 Deficiency on Tau and Amyloid
Pathogenesis
Mentored New Investigator Research Grant to Promote
Diversity—$149,774 over two years
What is the role of the glial cell arginase-1 in the formation of
amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles?

Page 6 of 7

Other disease-related molecules and pathways

Generation of Diverse Neural Culture Models of Alzheimer’s
Disease by Cell Reprogramming
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
Which exact set of transcription factors is required to produce
basal forebrain cholinergic neuron, and can engineered cells
exhibit the abnormalities characteristic of Alzheimer’s?

DNA Methylation Profiling of Alzheimer's Disease Brains
New Investigator Research Grant—$98,670 over two years
What specific genes and genetic regions are abnormally
methylated in Alzheimer’s?
Disruption of brain cell functions/properties

The Impact of Catalase Overexpression on Alzheimer’s
Pathology
Investigator-Initiated Research Grant—$200,000 over three
years
Do increased levels of catalase in nerve cells of the brain
prevent the development of Alzheimer's-like disease
characteristics


Alzheimer's Disease and the Destabilization of the
Mitochondrial Genome
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,549 over two years
Are changes in mitochondrial DNA responsible for initiating
Alzheimer’s disease?

Monitoring Effect of Hypertension on the BBB in APP Mice
Model of Alzheimer’s Disease
New Investigator Research Grant—$99,988 over two years
What are the effects of high blood pressure on the blood brain
barrier and how does it affect the development of Alzheimer’slike disease in the brain?
Synaptic dysfunction

Functional Analysis of Neurons Derived From Alzheimer’s
Patient iPSCs
New Investigator Research Grant—$100,000 over two years
What role does excitotoxicity play in dementia-related
synaptic decline?


Circuit-Based Strategies in Alzheimer’s Disease and Epilepsy
Neuronal Hyperexcitability in Seizures and Alzheimer’s Disease
Research Grant--$339,956 over three years
Can anticonvulsant drugs reduce or prevent hyperexcitability
that precedes neurodegeneration in the perforant path
and hippocampus?

2012 Research Grants Portfolio – Organized by research category

Page 7 of 7


