2013 Alzheimer’s Association® Grant Awards and
Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile
In 2013 the Alzheimer’s Association made investments totaling
approximately $14.8 million in more than 75 scientific
investigations. These include grant awards to 66 projects funded
through its International Research Grant Program (IRGP),
representing proposals ranked highest by peer-reviewers in an
extremely competitive field of 605 applications (invited from over
1,000 LOIs), and strategic research initiatives.
Since 1982 the Alzheimer’s Association has invested over $315
million in more than 2,200 scientific investigations. As of August
2013, more than 350 of these investigations are on-going in 22
countries.
Research themes


47 percent of the funded projects are exploring the molecular
mechanisms that contribute to disease-related processes
including the production of beta-amyloid, the mediators of
beta-amyloid’s toxicity and its adverse effect on cell-to-cell
communication, the abnormal chemical alterations of tau, and
the normal functions of related proteins implicated in
Alzheimer’s disease pathology. These projects may also
examine the cellular properties and functions that normally
protect and maintain neurons in the brain.



6 percent of the projects are examining various factors that
may contribute to Alzheimer’s and other dementias,
including blood vessel damage and genetic risk factors.



23 percent of the projects are investigating brain imaging,
biomarkers, and clinical tools that may result in earlier and
more accurate diagnoses, timelier interventions, and effective
disease monitoring.



20 percent of the projects are exploring novel treatment
strategies, non-pharmacological interventions, ways to
improve care for people with dementia through new
technologies, and the values and beliefs of diverse cultures
that impact the use of health services.



4 percent of the projects are studying ways to improve care
for people with dementia through new technologies and
exploring the values and beliefs of diverse cultures that
impact the use of health services.

Awards by category
8 Investigator-Initiated Research Grants (IIRG) have been
awarded to established scientists exploring important questions
across the entire research spectrum, from basic neurobiology
and genetic risk factors to disease-modifying treatments and
evidence-based, quality care.
37 New Investigator Research Grants (NIRG) are growing
the next generation of scientists with funding that enables them
to gather preliminary data, test procedures, and develop
hypotheses. These grants advance research while supporting the
early-career development of researchers who have earned their
doctoral degrees within the last 10 years.

2 Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer Care (ETAC)
Grants have been awarded in partnership with Intel
Corporation to investigators who are exploring how computers,
monitoring devices, and other electronics can be used to meet
the day-to-day needs of people with Alzheimer’s disease and
those who care for them.
2 New Investigator Research Grants to Promote Diversity
(NIRGD) are funding investigators currently underrepresented
at academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or other dementias
research. They are conducting basic, clinical, and
social/behavioral research grounded in the advanced methods
and experimental approaches needed to solve problems related
to Alzheimer’s.
2 Mentored New Investigator Research Grants to Promote
Diversity (MNIRGD) are helping close the gap between
diverse and non-diverse investigator populations, as well as
providing a forum for further training and support for a senior
scientist. The MNIRGD is intended to enhance the capacity of
scientists to conduct basic, clinical, and social/behavioral
research.
5 Understanding the Development and Devising Treatments
for Alzheimer’s Disease in Individuals with Down
Syndrome (DS/AD) Grants in 2 award programs as part of a
new initiative to understand the development of Alzheimer’s in
individuals with Down Syndrome: 3 DS/AD Investigator
Initiated (DSADIIP) Grants are funding established scientists,
and 2 DS/AD New Investigator (DSADNIP) Grants are
supporting the next generation of scientists. This initiative was
co-funded by the Alzheimer’s Association, Global Down
Syndrome Foundation, and the Linda Crnic Institute for Down
Syndrome.
5 Zenith Fellows Awards (ZNTH) have been made to senior
scientists who have made significant contributions to the field
and who continue to pursue promising lines of investigation
about disease mechanisms, diagnosis, novel treatments, and
quality care.
2 Part the Cloud Translational Research for Alzheimer’s
Disease (PCTR) Grants and 3 Part the Cloud Translational
Research Bridge for Alzheimer’s Disease (PCTRB) Grants
are funding translational research in Northern California in
partnership with the Part the Cloud Gala. The Alzheimer's
Association launched this new initiative to increase the research
efforts in Phase I clinical trials directed toward Alzheimer’s
disease and other dementias. In addition, Part the Cloud has
provided support for the Whole Genome Sequencing in the
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (WGS-ADNI), a
project to sequence the whole genome of more than 800
individuals who are part of the ADNI cohort. The genome data
is available on an open-access platform to researchers around
the world.

Page 1 of 2

2013 Alzheimer’s Association® Grant Awards and
Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile
Strategic Research Initiatives
A leader in Alzheimer’s disease research, the Alzheimer’s
Association has launched four New Strategic Research
Initiatives this year to advance emerging issues and establish
partnerships around the globe, including the:
Hippocampal Label Expansion Project to standardize and
validate measures of changes in brain volume;
Whole Genome Sequencing of ADNI (WGS-ADNI)
participants to obtain the full genome sequencing of more than
800 people, the largest ever undertaken in a single disease;
Computerized Cognitive Composite for Clinical Trials
project to develop tools for early diagnosis; and
Robert Katzman, MD, Clinical Research Training
Fellowship in Alzheimer’s Research, a collaboration with the
American Brain Foundation/American Academy of Neurology
to support training for physicians in Alzheimer’s disease-related
medicine.
In addition, the Alzheimer’s Association continues to provide
support for ongoing Strategic Research Initiatives that are
advancing the overall field and growing global collaborations to
address Alzheimer’s, including the:
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-2) to
monitor and assess biological changes associated with
Alzheimer’s disease, including imaging, cerebrospinal fluid,
genetics, and many other measures (started October 2011)
Alzheimer’s Association Multi-Center Program Grant
Awards (MCPG) to enable four scientists to work
collaboratively on a common project (started January 2012);
and
Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Network Trials Unit
(DIAN-TU) to test therapeutics on individuals with familial
Alzheimer’s disease (started February 2012).

Peer-reviewed evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific Relations
Division engages a panel of three or four volunteer scientists to
evaluate the merits of each proposal anonymously. More than
1,400 reviewers participated in 2013. The Association’s Medical
and Scientific Advisory Council (MSAC) ensures the fairness of
these evaluations and fine-tunes each year’s awards so that the
overall portfolio covers established research areas and moves the
field forward in important new directions. Based on the peerreview scores and the MSAC’s review, the Association’s science
staff estimates that approximately 32 percent of the proposals
received in 2013 deserved funding. Only about 10.9 percent could
be supported with available resources.
With every peer-reviewed research grant awarded by the
Alzheimer’s Association, all indirect costs are capped at 10
percent (rent for laboratory/ office space is expected to be covered
by indirect costs paid to the institution). The Association expects
and enforces that 90 percent of the grant goes directly to funding
the research itself. No more than 10 percent of the grant can be
directed to administrative costs
Page 2 of 2

