®

2014 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards and
Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile
In 2014 the Alzheimer’s Association® made investments totaling
nearly $14 million in 88 scientific investigations. These include
grant awards to 78 projects funded through its International
Research Grant Program (IRGP), representing proposals ranked
highest by a peer-reviewed process in an extremely competitive
field of 537 applications that were invited from over 1,100 letters
of intent.
Since 1982 the Alzheimer’s Association has invested over $335
million in more than 2,250 scientific investigations. As of
August 2014, its active investments were enabling over 350
investigations in twenty-one countries.
Research Categories
Molecular Pathogenesis and Physiology of Alzheimer's
Disease – 41% of the funded projects are exploring the
mechanisms that contribute to disease-related processes
including the production of beta-amyloid, the mediators of betaamyloid’s toxicity and its adverse effect on cell-to-cell
communication, the abnormal chemical alterations of tau, and
the normal functions of related proteins implicated in
Alzheimer’s disease pathology. These projects may also examine
the cellular properties and functions that normally protect and
maintain neurons in the brain.
Diagnosis, Assessment and Disease Monitoring – 23% of the
projects are investigating brain imaging, biomarkers, and clinical
tools that may result in earlier and more accurate diagnoses,
timelier interventions, and effective disease monitoring.
Translational Research and Clinical Interventions – 21% of
the projects are exploring novel treatment strategies and nonpharmacological interventions.
Epidemiology – 9% of the projects are examining various
factors that may contribute to Alzheimer’s and other
dementias, including blood vessel damage and genetic risk
factors.
Care, Support and Health Economics of Alzheimer's
Disease – 6% of the projects are studying ways to improve care
for people with dementia through new technologies and
exploring the values and beliefs of diverse cultures that impact
the use of health services.

Specific Grant Competitions
(15) Investigator-Initiated Research Grants (IIRG) have been
awarded to established scientists exploring important research
questions targeted at the following areas:
(5) Biological Underpinnings of Genetic Risk Factors in
Alzheimer’s Disease (IIRG-BGF) awards are promoting
understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms of the
genetic risk factors, identified by Genome Wide Association
Studies (GWAS) or other genomic approaches, associated
with Alzheimer’s and other dementias.
(4) Discovery-Validation of Therapeutic Targets for
Developing Novel Interventions for Alzheimer’s Disease
(IIRG-DVT) awards are stimulating the discovery and
validation of a broad spectrum of potential therapeutic targets
and/or agents that could be tested in human subjects as
putative disease-modifying interventions in Alzheimer’s.
(3) Non-Pharmacological Strategies to Ameliorate
Symptoms of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementia
(IIRG-NPSASA) awards are stimulating the scholarly
investigation of the development of non-pharmacological
strategies to improve the care of persons with Alzheimer’s
and other dementias.
(3) Role of Vascular Metabolic Factors in the
Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related
Dementia (IIRG-VMF) awards are broadening the
conceptual models and areas of exploration regarding
potential contributing factors to the pathogenesis of
neurodegeneration / Alzheimer’s disease / dementia.
(44) New Investigator Research Grants (NIRG) are growing
the next generation of scientists with funding that enables them
to gather preliminary data, test procedures, and develop
hypotheses. These grants advance research while supporting the
early-career development of researchers who have earned their
doctoral degrees within the last 10 years.
(2) New Investigator Research Grants to Promote Diversity
(NIRGD) are funding investigators currently underrepresented at
academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or other dementias research.
They are conducting basic, clinical, and social/ behavioral
research grounded in the advanced methods and experimental
approaches needed to solve problems related to Alzheimer’s.

Page 1 of 2

®

2014 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards and
Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile
(3) Mentored New Investigator Research Grants to Promote
Diversity (MNIRGD) are helping close the gap between diverse
and non-diverse investigator populations, as well as providing a
forum for further training and support for a senior scientist. They
are intended to enhance the capacity of scientists to conduct
basic, clinical, and social/behavioral research.
(1) Everyday Technologies for Alzheimer Care (ETAC)
Grant has been awarded to an investigator exploring how
computers, monitoring devices, and other electronics can be used
to meet the day-to-day needs of people with Alzheimer’s disease
and those who care for them.

(4) Zenith Fellows Awards (ZNTH) have been awarded to
senior scientists who have made significant contributions to the
field and who continue to pursue promising lines of investigation
in disease mechanisms, diagnosis, novel treatments, and quality
care.
(9) Biomarkers Across Neurodegenerative Disease (BAND)
awards are enabling researchers to analyze data of existing
cohorts to discover biomarkers, develop assay standardization,
identify genetic profiles, and optimize imaging modalities across
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias to increase an
understanding of the similarities or differences between these
diseases and to help stratify populations and possible treatments.

Strategic Research Initiatives
The Alzheimer’s Association is able to identify and enable special
projects with elevated potential for advancing the field. In 2014 it
supported 10 new and ongoing strategic research initiatives to
advance emerging issues and facilitate global collaboration.
African American Genome Sequencing to Assess
Alzheimer’s Risk to sequence the genome of African
Americans in order to study the role of gene variants in the
development of Alzheimer’s disease.
Alzheimer’s Association Multi-Center Program Grant
Awards (MCPG) to enable four scientists to work
collaboratively on a common project investigating the role of
the immune system and inflammation in Alzheimer’s.
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-2) to
monitor and assess biological changes associated with
Alzheimer’s with imaging, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, and
many other measures.
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (Add-On) to
help support ADNI by developing methodologies and
standardization protocols to measure changes in the volume
of hippocampal sub-regions.
Alzheimer’s Disease Regulatory Science Fellowship at the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in partnership with the
Reagan-Udall Foundation for the FDA to train physicians to
facilitate communication and collaboration between the FDA
and the various Alzheimer’s stakeholders in order to develop
products to treat, prevent, or cure Alzheimer’s.
Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Network Trials Unit
(DIAN-TU) to test therapeutics on individuals with familial
Alzheimer’s disease.
Global Alzheimer’s Association Interactive Network
(GAAIN), a cloud-based, digital network that will provide
researchers access to a vast repository of shared Alzheimer’s
research data and the sophisticated analytical tools and
computational power needed to analyze it.

Global Consortium for Biomarker Standardization
(GCBS), a program to develop high-quality, standardized
procedures and laboratory tests to be used globally to
measure CSF biomarkers to identify Alzheimer’s disease
and for the enrollment of participants into clinical trials.
National Biomedical Research Ethics Council (NBREC)
to establish a National Institutional Review Board for
neurodegenerative disease for large, multi-center clinical
trials to improve the safety of human subjects while
reducing the time and cost of these studies.
Study of Knowledge and Reactions to Amyloid Testing
(SOKRATES) to better understand how individuals respond
to having an amyloid positive status, its impact on his or her
social relationships, and the perceptions of stigma and
discrimination for those individuals.
Peer-Reviewed Evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific Relations
Division engages a panel of three or four volunteer scientists to
evaluate the merits of each proposal anonymously. More than
1,100 reviewers from 31 countries provided over 1,750 reviews
in 2014. The Association’s Medical and Scientific Advisory
Council (MSAC) ensures the fairness of these evaluations and
fine-tunes each year’s awards so that the overall portfolio
covers established research areas and moves the field forward in
important new directions. Based on the peer-review scores and
the MSAC’s review, the Association’s science staff estimates
that approximately 25 percent of the proposals received in 2014
deserved funding. Only about 14.5 percent could be supported
with available resources.
With every peer-reviewed research grant awarded by the
Alzheimer’s Association, all indirect costs are capped at 10
percent (rent for laboratory/ office space is expected to be
covered by indirect costs paid to the institution). The
Association expects and enforces that 90 percent of the grant
goes directly to funding the research itself. No more than 10
percent of the grant can be directed to administrative costs.

Page 2 of 2

