2015 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards and
Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile

In 2015 the Alzheimer’s Association® made investments
totaling over $17 million in more than 80 scientific
investigations. These include grant awards to 68 projects
funded through its International Research Grant Program
(IRGP), representing proposals ranked highest by a peerreviewed process in an extremely competitive field of 540
applications that were submitted from over 1,040 letters of
intent.
Since 1982 the Alzheimer’s Association has invested over
$350 million in more than 2,300 scientific investigations.
As of August 2015, the Association’s active investments of
over $80 million were enabling more than 350 investigations
in 21 countries.

Research Categories
Molecular Pathogenesis and Physiology of Alzheimer's
Disease – 43% of the funded projects are exploring the
mechanisms that contribute to disease-related processes
including the production of beta-amyloid, the mediators of
beta-amyloid’s toxicity and its adverse effect on cell-to-cell
communication, the abnormal chemical alterations of tau,
and the normal functions of related proteins implicated in
Alzheimer’s disease pathology. These projects may also
examine the cellular properties and functions that normally
protect and maintain neurons in the brain.
Diagnosis, Assessment and Disease Monitoring – 15% of
the projects are investigating brain imaging, biomarkers, and
clinical tools that may result in earlier and more accurate
diagnoses, timelier interventions, and effective disease
monitoring.
Translational Research and Clinical Interventions –
31% of the projects are exploring novel treatment strategies
and non- pharmacological interventions.
Epidemiology – 3% of the projects are examining various
factors that may contribute to Alzheimer’s and other
dementias, including blood vessel damage and genetic risk
factors.
Care, Support and Health Economics of Alzheimer's
Disease – 7% of the projects are studying ways to
improve care for people with dementia through new
technologies and exploring the values and beliefs of
diverse cultures that impact the use of health services.

Specific Grant Competitions
(Number of grants per competition are indicated in parentheses)

(13) Investigator-Initiated Research Grants (IIRG) have
been awarded to established scientists exploring important
research questions targeted at the following areas:
(2) Biological Underpinnings of Genetic Risk Factors in
Alzheimer’s Disease (IIRG-BFG) awards are promoting
understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms
of the genetic risk factors associated with Alzheimer’s
and other dementias.
(1) Discovery-Validation of Therapeutic Targets for
Developing Novel Interventions for Alzheimer’s
Disease (IIRG-DVT) awards are stimulating the
discovery and validation of a broad spectrum of
potential therapeutic targets and/or agents that could be
tested in human subjects as putative disease- modifying
interventions in Alzheimer’s.
(4) Non-Pharmacological Strategies to Ameliorate
Symptoms of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related
Dementia (IIRG-NPSASA) awards are stimulating the
development of non-pharmacological strategies to
improve the care of persons with Alzheimer’s and other
dementias.
(2) Role of Vascular Metabolic Factors in the
Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related
Dementia (IIRG-VMF) awards are broadening the
conceptual models and areas of exploration regarding
potential contributing factors to the brain changes of
neurodegeneration / Alzheimer’s disease / dementia.
(4) Understanding the Development and Devising
Treatments for Alzheimer’s Disease in Individuals
with Down Syndrome (IIRG-DSAD) awards are
broadening the understanding of the mechanism(s) that
lead to the initiation of Alzheimer’s in this specific
population, with the intent to identify novel therapeutic
strategies to treat Alzheimer’s in both the Down
syndrome and non-Down syndrome populations. These
grants are co-funded by the Alzheimer’s Association,
Global Down Syndrome Foundation and the Linda Crnic
Institute for Down Syndrome.

Page 1

2015 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards and
Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile

Specific Grant Competitions (cont.)
(41) New Investigator Research Grants (NIRG) are growing
the next generation of scientists with funding that enables them to
gather preliminary data, test procedures and develop hypotheses.
These grants advance research while supporting the early-career
development of researchers who have earned their doctoral
degrees within the last 10 years.
(2) New Investigator Research Grants to Promote Diversity
(NIRGD) are funding investigators currently underrepresented at
academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or other dementias research.
They are conducting basic, clinical and social/behavioral
research grounded in the advanced methods and experimental
approaches needed to solve problems related to Alzheimer’s.
(2) Mentored New Investigator Research Grants to Promote
Diversity (MNIRGD) are helping close the gap between
diverse and non-diverse investigator populations, as well as
providing a forum for further training and support for a senior
scientist. They are intended to enhance the capacity of scientists to
conduct basic, clinical, and social/behavioral research.
(5) Part the Cloud Translational Research Funding for
Alzheimer’s Disease (PTCR) grants have been awarded in
partnership with the Part the Cloud initiative to increase the
research efforts in Phase I and Phase II clinical trials directed
towards Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias in North
America. These awards have been made possible by the Part the
Cloud gala and steering committee.
(4) Zenith Fellows Awards (ZNTH) have been awarded to
senior scientists who have made significant contributions to the
field and who continue to pursue promising lines of
investigation in disease mechanisms, diagnosis, novel treatments,
and quality care.
(1) Katzman Fellowship is a collaboration between the
American Brain Foundation, the American Academy of
Neurology, and the Alzheimer’s Association to support training
for physicians in Alzheimer’s disease-related medicine.

Page 2

2015 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards and
Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile
Strategic Research Initiatives
The Alzheimer’s Association is able to identify and enable
special projects with elevated potential for advancing the field. In
2015 the Association supported 12 new and ongoing strategic
research initiatives to advance emerging issues and facilitate
global collaboration.

Hippocampal Sub-Region Standardization in the
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative to help
support ADNI by developing methodologies and
standardization protocols to measure changes in the volume of
hippocampal sub-regions.

Accelerating Medicines Partnership - Alzheimer’s Disease
Project (AMP-AD) is a collaboration between the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), biopharmaceutical companies and
non-profit organizations such as the Alzheimer’s Association to
develop new diagnostics and treatments by jointly identifying
and validating promising biological targets in Alzheimer’s.

Longitudinal Evaluation of Amyloid Risk and
Neurodegeneration (LEARN) is a first-of-its-kind natural
history study to determine whether the rate of cognitive
decline during the development of Alzheimer’s is directly
related to biological markers, such beta-amyloid and tau.
LEARN is a companion study to the Anti-Amyloid Treatment
in Asymptomatic Alzheimer’s Disease (A4) Study.

Advance Care Planning in Patients with AD Dementia
seeks to gain a better understanding of the status of care
planning among patients with dementia and examine how this
differs by race and disease stage.
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-2)
monitors and assesses biological changes associated with
Alzheimer’s with imaging, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, and
other measures.
Alzheimer’s Prevention Initiative - APOE study focuses on
determining whether therapies targeting amyloid may prevent
or delay the emergence of Alzheimer’s symptoms in people
who are at high genetic risk for developing the disease
because they have two copies of the APOE4 gene.
Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Network Trials Unit
(DIAN-TU) tests therapeutics on individuals with familial
Alzheimer’s disease.
DIAN-TU Tau Imaging (Add-On) develops and validates
tau PET imaging in individuals with autosomal-dominant
Alzheimer’s disease (ADAD) and investigates how specific
treatments alter the formation of abnormal tau.
Global Alzheimer’s Association Interactive Network
(GAAIN) ™ is a cloud-based, digital network that provides
researchers access to a vast repository of shared Alzheimer’s
research data and the sophisticated analytical tools and
computational power needed to analyze it.
Global Biomarker Standardization Consortium (GBSC) is a
program to develop high-quality, standardized procedures and
laboratory tests to be used globally to measure CSF
biomarkers to identify Alzheimer’s disease and for the
enrollment of participants into clinical trials.

National Biomedical Research Ethics Council (NBREC)
establishes a National Institutional Review Board for
neurodegenerative disease for large, multi-center clinical
trials to improve the safety of human subjects and to reduce
the time and cost of these studies.
Quality Control Program for CSF Biomarkers is a
program to improve the quality of all aspects of CSF
biomarker measurements, enabling values to be
harmonized world-wide and helping both clinical trials and
standard medical practice.
Peer-Reviewed Evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific
Relations Division engages a panel of three or four
volunteer scientists to evaluate the merits of each proposal
anonymously. More than 1,050 reviewers from 29 countries
provided over 1,700 reviews in 2015. The Association’s
Medical and Scientific Advisory Council (MSAC) ensures
the fairness of these evaluations and fine-tunes each year’s
awards so that the overall portfolio covers established
research areas and moves the field forward in important
new directions. Based on the peer-review scores and the
MSAC’s review, the Association’s science staff estimates
that approximately 31 percent of the proposals received in
2015 deserved funding. Nearly 13 percent could be
supported with available resources.
With every peer-reviewed research grant awarded by the
Alzheimer’s Association, all indirect costs are capped at 10
percent (rent for laboratory/ office space is expected to be
covered by indirect costs paid to the institution). The
Association expects and enforces that 90 percent of the grant
goes directly to funding the research itself. No more than 10
percent of a grant can be directed to administrative costs.
Page 3

