2016 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards
and Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile

In 2016 the Alzheimer’s Association® made investments
totaling nearly $25 million in more than 135 scientific
investigations. These include grant awards to 120 projects
funded through its International Research Grant Program
(IRGP), representing proposals ranked highest by a peerreviewed process in an extremely competitive field of over
730 applications that were submitted from more than 1,200
letters of intent.
Since 1982 the Alzheimer’s Association has invested over
$375 million in more than 2,400 scientific investigations. As
the world's largest nonprofit funder of Alzheimer's research,
the Alzheimer's Association is currently investing more than
$90 million in over 350 best-of-field active projects in 18
countries.

Research Categories
Molecular Pathogenesis and Physiology of Alzheimer's
Disease – 45% of the funded projects are exploring the
mechanisms that contribute to disease-related processes
including the production of beta-amyloid, the mediators of
beta-amyloid’s toxicity and its adverse effect on cell-to-cell
communication, the abnormal chemical alterations of tau,
and the functions of related proteins implicated in
Alzheimer’s disease pathology. These projects may also
examine the cellular properties and functions that normally
protect and maintain neurons in the brain.
Diagnosis, Assessment and Disease Monitoring – 24% of
the projects are investigating brain imaging, biomarkers, and
clinical tools that may result in earlier and more accurate
diagnoses, timelier interventions, and effective disease
monitoring.

Specific Grants Competitions
(Number of grants per competition are indicated in parentheses)
(20) Alzheimer's Association Research Grants (AARG) to
fund investigators who are less than 15 years past their doctoral
or medical degree, or investigators that are new to the
Alzheimer’s and related dementias field of research. The
purpose of this program is to provide funding for innovative
ideas that will develop preliminary or pilot data, to test
procedures and to develop hypotheses.
(5) Alzheimer's Association Research Grants to Promote
Diversity (AARG-D) similar to the AARG, with focus on
investigators who are currently underrepresented at academic
institutions in Alzheimer’s or related dementias research. The
objective of this award is to increase the number of highly
trained investigators from diverse backgrounds whose basic,
clinical and social/behavioral research interests are grounded in
the advanced methods and experimental approaches needed to
solve problems related to Alzheimer’s and related dementias in
general and in health disparities populations.
(25) Alzheimer's Association Research Fellowships (AARF)
to support exceptional researchers who are engaged in their postgraduate work (i.e. postdoctoral fellows) and before they have
their first independent faculty positions (i.e. Assistant Professor)
with the goal of bridging the fellow to faculty positions of
researchers.
(7) Alzheimer's Association Research Fellowships to Promote
Diversity (AARF-D) similar to the AARF, with focus on
increasing support to exceptional researchers who are currently
underrepresented at academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or
related dementias research.

Epidemiology – 5% of the projects are examining various
factors that may contribute to Alzheimer’s and other
dementias, including blood vessel damage and genetic risk
factors.

(5) Alzheimer's Association Clinical Fellowships (AACF) to
support research training in Alzheimer's and related dementias
for clinical fellows who have completed their residency (MD),
postdoctoral fellowship (PhD), or both (MD/PhD). For the
purpose of this fellowship, clinical research is defined as patientoriented research conducted with human subjects, or
translational research specifically designed to develop treatments
or enhance diagnosis of neurological disease. This includes the
Robert Katzman Fellowship, in collaboration with the American
Academy of Neurology and the American Brain Foundation.

Care, Support and Health Economics of Alzheimer's
Disease – 3% of the projects are studying ways to improve
care for people with dementia through new technologies and
exploring the values and beliefs of diverse cultures that
impact the use of health services.

(1) Alzheimer's Association Clinical Fellowship to Promote
Diversity (AACF-D) similar to the AACF, with focus on
increasing support to exceptional clinical fellows who are
currently underrepresented at academic institutions in clinical
research training in Alzheimer's and related dementias.

Translational Research and Clinical Interventions –
23% of the projects are exploring novel treatment strategies
and non-pharmacological interventions.

Page 1

2016 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards
and Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile

Specific Grant Competitions (cont.)
(23) New Investigator Research Grants (NIRG) to grow
the next generation of scientists with funding that enables
them to gather preliminary data, test procedures and develop
hypotheses. These grants advance research while supporting
the early-career development of scientists who have earned
their doctoral degrees within the last 10 years.
(1) New Investigator Research Grant to Promote
Diversity (NIRGD) to fund investigators currently
underrepresented at academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or
related dementias research. They are conducting basic,
clinical and social/behavioral research grounded in the
advanced methods and experimental approaches needed to
solve problems related to Alzheimer’s.
(2) Mentored New Investigator Research Grants to
Promote Diversity (MNIRGD) to help close the gap
between diverse and non-diverse investigator populations, as
well as providing a forum for further training and support
with a senior scientist mentor. They are intended to enhance
the capacity of scientists to conduct basic, clinical, and
social/behavioral research.
(4) Zenith Fellows Awards (ZNTH) to support senior
scientists who have made significant contributions to the
field of Alzheimer's and related dementia research, and who
continue to pursue promising lines of investigation in disease
mechanisms, diagnosis, novel treatments, and quality care.
(2) Mechanisms of Cellular Death in Neurodegeneration
(MCDN) awards in collaboration with Alzheimer's Research
UK and the Weston Brain Institute, to enable researchers to
discover and understand the mechanisms that underlie brain
cell loss in neurodegenerative diseases, and to identify
potential therapeutic interventions to sustain healthy brain
function.

(2) Part the Cloud Translational Research Funding for
Alzheimer’s Disease (PTCR) awards in partnership with the
Part the Cloud initiative to increase research efforts in Phase I
and Phase II clinical trials directed towards Alzheimer’s
disease and other dementias internationally. These awards
have been made possible by funding from Part the Cloud,
benefiting the Alzheimer's Association.
(4) Part the Cloud Challenge on Neuroinflammation
(PTC-C) awards in partnership with the Part the Cloud
initiative to support early-stage human clinical trials that target
brain inflammation as an innovative avenue for Alzheimer's
disease therapy. At completion of the 2-year award,
researchers will have the opportunity to compete for an
additional prize of up to $3M to further their proposed
therapy's development. These awards have been made possible
by funding from Part the Cloud, benefiting the Alzheimer's
Association.
(8) Collaboration 4 Cure (C4C) awards to unite research
infrastructure and expertise from San Diego area institutions
with the goal of stimulating collaborative translational
research to speed the path to Alzheimer's disease drug
development.
(11) Biomarkers Across Neurodegenerative Disease
(BAND) awards in collaboration with Alzheimer's Research
UK, The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research,
and the Weston Brain Institute, to enable researchers to
analyze data of existing cohorts to discover biomarkers,
develop assay standardization, identify genetic profiles, and
optimize imaging modalities across Alzheimer’s disease and
other dementias to increase understanding of the similarities or
differences between these diseases and to help stratify
populations and possible treatments.

Page 2

2016 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards
and Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile
Strategic Research Initiatives
The Alzheimer’s Association is able to identify and enable
special projects with elevated potential for advancing the field.
In 2016 the Association supported 15 new and ongoing
strategic research initiatives to advance emerging issues and
facilitate global collaboration.
Accelerating Medicines Partnership - Alzheimer’s Disease
Project (AMP-AD) is a collaboration between the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), biopharmaceutical companies and
non-profit organizations such as the Alzheimer’s Association to
develop new diagnostics and treatments by jointly identifying
and validating promising biological targets in Alzheimer’s.
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
Hippocampal Sub-Region Standardization to develop
methodologies and standardization protocols to measure
changes in the volume of hippocampal sub-regions of the brain.
Alzheimer’s Prevention Initiative (API) Generation Study to
determine whether therapies targeting amyloid may prevent or
delay Alzheimer’s symptoms in people who are at high genetic
risk for developing the disease because they have two copies of
the APOE4 gene.

Imaging Dementia - Evidence for Amyloid Scanning (IDEAS)
Study to determine the clinical value of using brain amyloid PET
imaging in diagnosing and managing treatment of individuals age
65 and older with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia of
uncertain cause. The IDEAS Study is led by the Alzheimer's
Association and managed by the American College of Radiology
(ACR) and the American College of Radiology Imaging Network
(ACRIN).
Longitudinal
Evaluation
of
Amyloid
Risk
and
Neurodegeneration (LEARN) is a first-of-its-kind natural history
study to determine whether the rate of cognitive decline during the
development of Alzheimer’s is directly related to biological
markers, such beta-amyloid and tau. LEARN is a companion study
to the Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer’s
Disease (A4) Study.
Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) Consortium to support a
collaboration among four large research studies to identify and
examine biomarker changes in the earliest phases of Alzheimer's,
before memory loss occurs, with the goal of informing clinical
trial design for early phase treatments of Alzheimer's disease.

Autosomal Dominant and Late Onset Alzheimer's Disease
(DIAN-ADNI) Comparison Study to characterize similarities
and differences in biomarkers, memory changes and disease
progression in individuals with genetically-based, youngeronset Alzheimer's disease and individuals with the more
common sporadic, late-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Quality Control Program for CSF Biomarkers (QC-CSF) to
improve the quality of all aspects of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
biomarker measurements, enabling values to be harmonized worldwide and helping both clinical trials and standard medical practice.
QC-CSF is a key initiative of the Alzheimer's Association's Global
Biomarker Standardization Consortium (GBSC).

Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Network Trials Unit
(DIAN-TU) to test therapeutics on individuals with geneticallybased, younger-onset Alzheimer’s disease. DIAN-TU Tau
Imaging (Add-On) to develop and validate tau PET imaging in
DIAN participants and investigate how specific treatments may
alter the accumulation of abnormal tau in the brain.

Understanding Vascular Contributions to
Cognitive
Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease (VCID) to further
investigate how accumulation of beta-amyloid in the blood vessels
of the brain and cellular stress mechanisms are involved in
Alzheimer's and related dementias.

DIAN-TU Next Generation (NexGen) to accelerate the testing
of new potential Alzheimer's therapies and novel diagnostic
approaches in people with genetically-based, younger-onset
Alzheimer's disease using innovative trial design and laying the
foundation for the next generation of clinical trials in
Alzheimer's disease.

Peer-Review Evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific Relations
Division engages a panel of volunteer scientists to evaluate the
merits of each proposal anonymously. More than 1,000 reviewers
from 31 countries provided over 2,000 reviews in 2016. The
Association’s Medical and Scientific Advisory Council (MSAC)
ensures the fairness of these evaluations and fine-tunes each year’s
awards so that the overall portfolio covers established research
areas and moves the field forward in important new directions.
The Association estimates that approximately 36 percent of the
proposals received in 2016 deserved funding. Nearly 17 percent
could be supported with available resources.

Global Alzheimer’s Association Interactive Network
(GAAIN) ™ is a cloud-based, digital network that provides
researchers access to a vast repository of shared Alzheimer’s
research data and the sophisticated analytical tools and
computational power needed to analyze it. Support from the
Alzheimer's Association will facilitate data sharing through
GAAIN for the Framingham Heart Study (FHS) and the
Australian Imaging, Biomarkers & Lifestyle Study of Aging
(AIBL).

Research grants awarded by the Alzheimer’s Association have
indirect costs capped at 10%. The Association strictly enforces that
90% of the grant goes directly to funding the research itself.
Page 3

