2017 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards
and Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile
In aggressive pursuit of its vision of a world without
Alzheimer’s, the Alzheimer's Association made its largestever research investment in 2017 with grants of more than
$28 million to over 129 scientific investigations. As the
world's leading nonprofit funder of Alzheimer's research,
the Association is accelerating the field toward solutions for
the global Alzheimer's crisis.
Investments in 2017 include awards to 112 projects funded
through the International Research Grant Program,
representing proposals ranked highest by a peer-reviewed
process in an extremely competitive field of 486
applications that were submitted from 1,005 letters of
intent.
Since 1982, the Alzheimer’s Association has invested over
$405 million in more than 2,600 scientific investigations.
Currently, the Association is investing over $110 million in
nearly 400 best-of-field active projects in 18 countries.
Research Categories
Molecular Pathogenesis and Physiology of Alzheimer's
Disease – 54% of the funded projects are exploring the
mechanisms that contribute to disease-related processes
including the production of beta-amyloid, the mediators of
beta-amyloid’s toxicity and its adverse effect on cell-to-cell
communication, the abnormal chemical alterations of tau,
and the functions of related proteins implicated in
Alzheimer’s disease pathology. These projects may also
examine the cellular properties and functions that normally
protect and maintain neurons in the brain.
Diagnosis, Assessment and Disease Monitoring – 15% of
the projects are investigating brain imaging, biomarkers, and
clinical tools that may result in earlier and more accurate
diagnoses, timelier interventions, and effective disease
monitoring.
Translational Research and Clinical Interventions –
19% of the projects are exploring novel treatment strategies
and non-pharmacological interventions.
Epidemiology – 6% of the projects are examining various
factors that may contribute to Alzheimer’s and other
dementias, including blood vessel damage and genetic risk
factors.
Care, Support and Health Economics of Alzheimer's
Disease – 5% of the projects are studying ways to improve
care for people with dementia through new technologies and
exploring the values and beliefs of diverse cultures that

impact the use of health services.
Specific Grants Competitions
(Number of grants per competition are indicated in parentheses)
(39) Alzheimer's Association Research Grants (AARG) to
fund investigators who are less than 15 years past their doctoral
or medical degree, or investigators that are new to the
Alzheimer’s and related dementias field of research. The
purpose of this program is to provide funding for innovative
ideas that will develop preliminary or pilot data, to test
procedures and to develop hypotheses.
(10) Alzheimer's Association Research Grants to Promote
Diversity (AARG-D) similar to the AARG, with focus on
investigators who are currently underrepresented at academic
institutions in Alzheimer’s or related dementias research. The
objective of this award is to increase the number of highly
trained investigators from diverse backgrounds whose basic,
clinical and social/behavioral research interests are grounded in
the advanced methods and experimental approaches needed to
solve problems related to Alzheimer’s and related dementias in
general and in health disparities populations.
(31) Alzheimer's Association Research Fellowships (AARF)
to support exceptional researchers who are engaged in their postgraduate work (i.e. postdoctoral fellows) and before they have
their first independent faculty positions (i.e. Assistant Professor)
with the goal of bridging the fellow to faculty positions of
researchers.
(6) Alzheimer's Association Research Fellowships to Promote
Diversity (AARF-D) similar to the AARF, with focus on
increasing support to exceptional researchers who are currently
underrepresented at academic institutions in Alzheimer’s or
related dementias research.
(6) Alzheimer's Association Clinical Fellowships (AACSF)
to support research training in Alzheimer's and related
dementias for clinical fellows who have completed their
residency (MD), postdoctoral fellowship (PhD), or both
(MD/PhD). For the purpose of this fellowship, clinical research
is defined as patient- oriented research conducted with human
subjects, or translational research specifically designed to
develop treatments or enhance diagnosis of neurological
disease.
(3) Alzheimer's Association Clinical Fellowship to Promote
Diversity (AACF-D) similar to the AACF, with focus on
increasing support to exceptional clinical fellows who are
currently underrepresented at academic institutions in clinical
research training in Alzheimer's and related dementias.

Page 1

2017 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards
and Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile

Specific Grant Competitions (cont.)
(4) Zenith Fellows Awards (ZNTH) to support senior
scientists who have made significant contributions to the
field of Alzheimer's and related dementia research, and who
continue to pursue promising lines of investigation in disease
mechanisms, diagnosis, novel treatments, and quality care.
(9) Alzheimer’s Association Sex and Gender in
Alzheimer’s (SAGA) research grant awards are to advance
understanding of the disproportionate effect of Alzheimer’s
disease on women. SAGA grants are investigating how
gender- and sex-related biology, genetics and lifestyle
contribute to Alzheimer’s.
(4) Part the Cloud Translational Research Funding
for Alzheimer’s Disease (PTC) awards in partnership
with the Part the Cloud initiative to increase research
efforts in Phase I and Phase II clinical trials directed
towards Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias
internationally. These awards have been made possible by
funding from Part the Cloud, benefiting the Alzheimer's
Association.
Peer-Review Evaluation
The Alzheimer’s Association Medical and Scientific
Relations Division engages a panel of volunteer
scientists to evaluate the merits of each proposal
anonymously. More than 750 reviewers from 31 countries
provided over 1,400 reviews in 2017. The Association’s
Medical and Scientific Advisory Council (MSAC)
evaluates the fairness of these reviews and makes
recommendations on each year’s awards so that the
overall portfolio covers established research areas and
moves the field forward in important new directions.
The Association estimates that approximately 31 percent
of the proposals received in 2017 deserved funding.
T we n t y - t h r e e ( 2 3 % ) percent of projects were
supported with available resources.
Research grants awarded by the Alzheimer’s
Association International Research Grant Program have
indirect costs capped at 10%. The Association strictly
enforces that at least 90% of the grant goes directly to
funding the research itself.

Page 2

2017 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards
and Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile
Strategic Research Initiatives
The Alzheimer’s Association is able to identify and enable
special projects with elevated potential for advancing the field.
In 2017 the Association supported 17 new and ongoing
strategic research initiatives to advance emerging issues and
facilitate global collaboration.
Advance Care Planning in Patients with AD Dementia is a
study to develop a greater understanding of advanced care
planning (ACP) as it differs by disease stage and race in
individuals with dementia. This will be done in conjunction
with Alzheimer's Disease Centers across the country.
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is to
discover, standardize, and validate biomarkers for AD clinical
treatment trials. Support has been provided for ADNI3, and the
Hippocampal Sub-Region Standardization to develop
methodologies and standardization protocols to measure
changes in the volume of hippocampal sub-regions of the brain.
Alzheimer’s Prevention Initiative (API) Generation Study to
determine whether therapies targeting amyloid may prevent or
delay Alzheimer’s symptoms in people who are at high genetic
risk for developing the disease because they have two copies of
the APOE4 gene.
Autosomal Dominant and Late Onset Alzheimer's Disease
(DIAN-ADNI) Comparison Study to characterize similarities
and differences in biomarkers, memory changes and disease
progression in individuals with genetically-based, youngeronset Alzheimer's disease and individuals with the more
common sporadic, late-onset Alzheimer's disease.
Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Network Trials Unit
(DIAN-TU) to test therapeutics on individuals with geneticallybased, younger-onset Alzheimer’s disease. DIAN-TU Tau
Imaging (Add-On) to develop and validate tau PET imaging in
DIAN participants and investigate how specific treatments may
alter the accumulation of abnormal tau in the brain.
DIAN-TU Next Generation (NexGen) to accelerate the testing
of new potential Alzheimer's therapies and novel diagnostic
approaches in people with genetically-based, younger-onset
Alzheimer's disease using innovative trial design and laying the
foundation for the next generation of clinical trials in
Alzheimer's disease.
Global Alzheimer’s Association Interactive Network
(GAAIN) ™ is a cloud-based, digital network that provides
researchers access to a vast repository of shared Alzheimer’s
research data and the sophisticated analytical tools and
computational power needed to analyze it. Support from the
Alzheimer's Association will facilitate data sharing through
GAAIN for the Australian Imaging, Biomarkers & Lifestyle
Study of Aging (AIBL).

Global Brain Health Initiative (GBHI) and the Alzheimer’s
Association have partnered to offer a pilot fellowship program for
GBHI fellows to advance innovative and unique projects that
create social change.
Imaging Dementia - Evidence for Amyloid Scanning (IDEAS)
Study to determine the clinical value of using brain amyloid PET
imaging in diagnosing and managing treatment of individuals age
65 and older with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia of
uncertain cause. The IDEAS Study is led by the Alzheimer's
Association and managed by the American College of Radiology
(ACR) and the American College of Radiology Imaging Network
(ACRIN). Alzheimer’s Neuroimaging and Genetics Initiative
(ANGI) will collect genetic information from IDEAS participants.
The Brain Health Registry (BHR) is an online registry and
database for recruiting and screening volunteers and for
monitoring the progression of brain diseases.
Longitudinal
Evaluation
of
Amyloid
Risk
and
Neurodegeneration (LEARN) is a first-of-its-kind natural history
study to determine whether the rate of cognitive decline during the
development of Alzheimer’s is directly related to biological
markers, such beta-amyloid and tau. LEARN is a companion study
to the Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer’s
Disease (A4) Study.
Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) Consortium to support a
collaboration among four large research studies to identify and
examine biomarker changes in the earliest phases of Alzheimer's,
before memory loss occurs, with the goal of informing clinical
trial design for early phase treatments of Alzheimer's disease.
Quality Control Program for CSF Biomarkers (QC-CSF) to
improve the quality of all aspects of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
biomarker measurements, enabling values to be harmonized worldwide and helping both clinical trials and standard medical practice.
QC-CSF is a key initiative of the Alzheimer's Association's Global
Biomarker Standardization Consortium (GBSC).
Study of Knowledge and Reactions to Amyloid Testing
(SOKRATES) will investigate how learning amyloid imaging
status impacts social relationships, and perceptions of stigma and
discrimination for those individuals.
Understanding Vascular
Contributions to Cognitive
Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease (VCID) to further
investigate how accumulation of beta-amyloid in the blood vessels
of the brain and cellular stress mechanisms are involved in
Alzheimer's and related dementias.

2017 Alzheimer’s Association Grant Awards
and Strategic Research Initiatives
― Portfolio Profile

Emerging Areas of Research for Fiscal Year 2018
Vascular Contributions To Dementia and Amyloid and Tau
Lesions in APOE4 Carriers is a multisite research project led
by a team at University of Southern California to assess the
vascular changes that presage and likely contribute to the onset
and progression of Alzheimer’s and other dementias in carriers
of apolipoprotein E ε4 gene.
Ante-Amyloid Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease Study
(A3) is a prevention trial to treat individuals as young as 55
who are at risk for late-onset Alzheimer’s. Individuals with
very early amyloid deposition in their brain, but cognitively
normal will receive biomarker assessments and an
experimental anti-amyloid treatment.
DIAN-TU Dose Escalation Study is part of the DIAN-TU
Next Generation prevention trial testing therapies and

diagnostic approaches in people with genetically-based, youngeronset Alzheimer's disease. The Dose Escalation Study is an
approach to increase the dose of the experimental treatment to
maximize it therapeutic benefit.
Japanese Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (JADNI) is to discover, standardize, and validate biomarkers for AD
clinical treatment trials. The goal is to track changes over time in
biomarkers in MCI and early AD in the population of Japan.
TriBEKa is a multi-national study to develop comprehensive
models of Alzheimer’s disease focused on starting in midlife.
Three leading European dementia research centers in Barcelona,
Edinburgh and Karolinska are collaborating to analyze a large
collection of normal and Alzheimer’s-related imaging data and
biological samples in individuals starting at age 40 to model
disease onset and progression, as well as identify modifiable and
non-modifiable risk factors for Alzheimer’s.

Page 3

